Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 10/4/97

 October 4, 1997 

 Why greenbacks make good drug money

by J. Raloff

 Where there's money, there's cocaine.

 This aphorism doesn't just indicate the extent to which modern culture has 
embraced mood-altering drugs it's a fact. Fully 78 percent of the $1 bills 
circulating in Miami carry traces of cocaine, a federally funded study has 
found. So do similar shares of singles in Houston and Chicago. The only 
difference is that Miami's currency tends to carry more of the white powder.

 In conducting the analyses that established those numbers, Jack Demirgian of 
Argonne (Ill.) National Laboratory (ANL) and his colleagues handled hundreds of 
cocaine-tainted bills some bearing as much as 1 milligram each. Yet while the 
chemists' skin readily absorbed cocaine from other contaminated items, it never 
picked up the drug from dollars.

 To figure out why, Demirgian enlisted the help of Benjamin S. Tani, also of 
ANL, to study the bills with scanning electron microscopy. They saw no cocaine 
on the bills' surface; instead, they found it wedged in the nooks and crannies 
below.

 Magnified, the currency's linen fibers "look almost like hacksaw blades," 
Demirgian notes. "We think that cocaine particles on the surface become 
fractured by the natural bending of the bills" and fall into the irregular 
holes formed by the money's fibers. British paper currency, which his team 
examined this summer, has more rounded fibers and far smaller holes none 
apparently large enough for the cocaine crystals to enter.

"I think this study showed that [U.S.] money does like to hold onto the drugs 
that it comes into contact with," says Kent Lunsford of the Office of National 
Drug Control Policy in Washington, D.C. The finding, he says, seems to 
undermine the argument many lawyers had been tendering: that clients caught 
with cocaine on their hands had innocently picked it up from money.


