Science News Online - This Week - News Feature - 9/20/97

 September 20, 1997 

 Tinier transistors for tomorrow's chips

by I. Peterson

 In semiconductor manufacturing, fabricating smaller transistors and placing 
them closer together on a silicon integrated-circuit chip translates into 
faster computers.

 Today's advanced microprocessor chip has wires and surface features no thinner 
than 0.35 micrometer. To reach the high levels of performance that many 
researchers and others would like to see in future computers, manufacturers 
must develop technologies that significantly decrease that thickness.

 The announcement last week of the formation of a private industry consortium 
called the Extreme Ultraviolet Limited Liability Company marked the launch of a 
major project aimed at developing the technology needed to etch circuit lines 
less than 0.10 mm wide.

 In this effort, Intel Corp., Advanced Micro Devices, and Motorola have joined 
forces with the Lawrence Livermore (Calif.) National Laboratory, the Sandia 
National Laboratories in Livermore, and the Lawrence Berkeley (Calif.) National 
Laboratory to work under the umbrella of the newly created Virtual National 
Laboratory (VNL). The industry group will provide $250 million to VNL over the 
next 3 years to develop extreme ultraviolet lithography for commercial 
manufacturing of computer chips.

 A crucial part of semiconductor manufacturing involves an essentially 
photographic process of printing patterns to guide which parts of a silicon 
surface must be etched away. The industry group is betting that the use of 
electromagnetic radiation at a wavelength of 13 nanometers, pioneered at 
Sandia, can be successfully put into an industrial setting.

 Other groups have been working on approaches involving X-ray or electron-beam 
lithography. At this stage, however, Intel believes that extreme ultraviolet 
technology offers the greatest promise for commercial application, says 
spokesman Adam Grossberg.


