Science News Online (3/28/98): Magnetic materials keep fridges cool by C. Wu

 March 28, 1998 

 Magnetic materials keep fridges cool

by C. Wu

 Magnets turn many refrigerators into message centers and art galleries -- 
holding up notes, shopping lists, and the kids' latest masterpieces for all to 
see. Someday, magnets may not only adorn the outside of refrigerators but also 
power the inner workings of the appliances.

 Magnetocaloric materials, which change temperature in response to an applied 
magnetic field, form the heart of a new class of refrigeration technologies. 
Magnetocaloric refrigerators have the potential to be more efficient than 
conventional devices without relying on ozone-depleting coolants (SN: 9/6/97, 
p. 152).

 Materials now available perform their best in the powerful fields supplied by 
superconducting magnets, so the first applications will probably be in industry 
rather than home kitchens. Researchers presented a selection of recent findings 
at the American Physical Society meeting in Los Angeles last week.

 Carl Zimm and his colleagues at the Astronautics Corp. of America in Madison, 
Wis., have constructed a prototype magnetocaloric refrigerator in collaboration 
with researchers at the Department of Energy's Ames (Iowa) Laboratory. The 
field supplied by a superconducting magnet cools a piece of solid gadolinium, 
which in turn cools water flowing around it, says Zimm. Weaker, permanent 
magnets don't provide as much cooling power.

 As a heat-transferring fluid, water replaces the chlorofluorocarbons or 
hydrochlorofluorocarbons typical of ordinary refrigerators (SN: 3/9/96, p. 
151). "You can't get more environmentally safe than water," Zimm notes. The 
refrigerator cools a volume "about the size of a soda can," he adds. It has 
been running for nearly a year, which bodes well for reliability.

 Gadolinium has a magnetocaloric response twice that of iron, but Ames 
researchers Vitalij K. Pecharsky and Karl A. Gschneidner have found that alloys 
of gadolinium, silicon, and germanium show a response twice again as big.

 The magnetocaloric effect depends on the way a material's atomic spins align 
themselves. All materials store heat in the form of atomic vibrations. An 
applied magnetic field forces the atoms into alignment, reducing the system's 
heat capacity and causing it to expel energy, which the water carries away. 
When the field is removed, the atoms randomize again and can absorb energy from 
their surroundings, creating a cooling effect.

 By adjusting the alloy's composition, Pecharsky and Gschneidner can control 
the temperature at which the effect is greatest, from near room temperature 
down to about 30 kelvins.

 Another way to tune the magnetocaloric effect is to construct magnetic 
nanocomposites, says Robert D. Shull of the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology in Gaithersburg, Md. (SN: 4/23/94, p. 271). Scattering magnetic 
elements as small as 1 to 20 nanometers throughout a material changes its 
sensitivity to magnetic fields.

 Shull has modified a magnetocaloric material, gadolinium gallium garnet, by 
substituting iron for some of the gallium atoms. The addition of iron tripled 
the material's response to a magnetic field.

 The first application of magnetocaloric refrigeration would probably be for 
condensing hydrogen gas into a liquid for use as a clean-burning fuel (SN: 
11/1/97, p. 279). The liquefaction of hydrogen would require refrigerators with 
about 15 separate cooling stages, combining to reduce the temperature to 20 
kelvins, says Pecharsky. This method's greater efficiency will lower costs 
significantly, compared to traditional hydrogen liquefaction. Zimm estimates 
that it will take at least 5 years for an industrial magnetic refrigerator to 
become available.

 Magnets turn many refrigerators into message centers and art galleries -- 
holding up notes, shopping lists, and the kids' latest masterpieces for all to 
see. Someday, magnets may not only adorn the outside of refrigerators but also 
power the inner workings of the appliances.

 Magnetocaloric materials, which change temperature in response to an applied 
magnetic field, form the heart of a new class of refrigeration technologies. 
Magnetocaloric refrigerators have the potential to be more efficient than 
conventional devices without relying on ozone-depleting coolants (SN: 9/6/97, 
p. 152).

 Materials now available perform their best in the powerful fields supplied by 
superconducting magnets, so the first applications will probably be in industry 
rather than home kitchens. Researchers presented a selection of recent findings 
at the American Physical Society meeting in Los Angeles last week.

 Carl Zimm and his colleagues at the Astronautics Corp. of America in Madison, 
Wis., have constructed a prototype magnetocaloric refrigerator in collaboration 
with researchers at the Department of Energy's Ames (Iowa) Laboratory. The 
field supplied by a superconducting magnet cools a piece of solid gadolinium, 
which in turn cools water flowing around it, says Zimm. Weaker, permanent 
magnets don't provide as much cooling power.

 As a heat-transferring fluid, water replaces the chlorofluorocarbons or 
hydrochlorofluorocarbons typical of ordinary refrigerators (SN: 3/9/96, p. 
151). "You can't get more environmentally safe than water," Zimm notes. The 
refrigerator cools a volume "about the size of a soda can," he adds. It has 
been running for nearly a year, which bodes well for reliability.

 Gadolinium has a magnetocaloric response twice that of iron, but Ames 
researchers Vitalij K. Pecharsky and Karl A. Gschneidner have found that alloys 
of gadolinium, silicon, and germanium show a response twice again as big.

 The magnetocaloric effect depends on the way a material's atomic spins align 
themselves. All materials store heat in the form of atomic vibrations. An 
applied magnetic field forces the atoms into alignment, reducing the system's 
heat capacity and causing it to expel energy, which the water carries away. 
When the field is removed, the atoms randomize again and can absorb energy from 
their surroundings, creating a cooling effect.

 By adjusting the alloy's composition, Pecharsky and Gschneidner can control 
the temperature at which the effect is greatest, from near room temperature 
down to about 30 kelvins.

 Another way to tune the magnetocaloric effect is to construct magnetic 
nanocomposites, says Robert D. Shull of the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology in Gaithersburg, Md. (SN: 4/23/94, p. 271). Scattering magnetic 
elements as small as 1 to 20 nanometers throughout a material changes its 
sensitivity to magnetic fields.

 Shull has modified a magnetocaloric material, gadolinium gallium garnet, by 
substituting iron for some of the gallium atoms. The addition of iron tripled 
the material's response to a magnetic field.

 The first application of magnetocaloric refrigeration would probably be for 
condensing hydrogen gas into a liquid for use as a clean-burning fuel (SN: 
11/1/97, p. 279). The liquefaction of hydrogen would require refrigerators with 
about 15 separate cooling stages, combining to reduce the temperature to 20 
kelvins, says Pecharsky. This method's greater efficiency will lower costs 
significantly, compared to traditional hydrogen liquefaction. Zimm estimates 
that it will take at least 5 years for an industrial magnetic refrigerator to 
become available.

 References:  

 Pecharsky, V.K. 1998. The giant magnetocaloric effect. Meeting of the American 
Physical Society. Los Angeles. March.

 Shull, R.D. 1998. The enhanced magnetocaloric effect of magnetic 
nanocomposites. Meeting of the American Physical Society. Los Angeles. March

 Zimm, C. 1998. Sub-room temperature magnetic refrigerator. Meeting of the 
American Physical Society. Los Angeles. March.

 Further Readings: 

 Pecharsky, V.K., and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. 1997. Tunable magnetic regenerator 
alloys with a giant magnetocaloric effect for magnetic refrigeration from ~20 
to ~290 K. Applied Physics Letters 70(June 16):3299.

 Sources: 

 Vitalij K. Pecharsky Iowa State University Ames Laboratory Department of 
Materials Science and Engineering Ames, IA 50011-3020

 Robert D. Shull National Institute of Standards and Technology Magnetic 
Materials Group Gaithersburg, MD 20899

copyright 1998
