Science News Online (5/16/98): Fetal deaths climb with air pollution

 May 16, 1998

 Fetal deaths climb with air pollution

by J. Raloff

 Over the past decade, a host of studies has shown that a day or two after 
concentrations of certain key air pollutants rise, so do deaths among people 
with respiratory and heart disease, especially elderly people. Now, a Brazilian 
study has uncovered evidence of a similar vulnerability at the opposite end of 
the age spectrum-in the womb.

 Physicians in Sao Paulo must report all miscarriages that occur during the 
third trimester of pregnancy. On most days, there are about 8, though the count 
can run as low as 1 or as high as 18.

 Luiz A.A. Pereira of the University of Sao Paulo and his colleagues compared 
daily tallies of these fetal deaths in 1991 and 1992 to daily concentrations of 
major urban air pollutants: nitrogen dioxide (NO2), sulfur dioxide (SO2), 
carbon monoxide (CO), dust-size particulates, and ozone. Though the Sao Paulo 
area has dirty air, "levels of pollution there are not that different from what 
you see in many big cities in [North America]," even in the United States, 
observes Dana Loomis of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, a 
coauthor of the study.

 Overall, the team found no association between miscarriage rates and either 
ozone or particulates. However, the number of fetal deaths rose 3 days after 
measurable increases in each of the other pollutants. NO2 proved most strongly 
linked to those variations in miscarriage rates, even after accounting for such 
possible confounding factors as heat and humidity.

 It would appear "that about 20 percent of the fetal deaths may be attributed 
to the NO2," Pereira told Science News. He cautions, however, that "since there 
is a high correlation among these pollutants"-combustion usually spews copious 
amounts of all three-it's unwise to expect, at least at this stage, that any 
one pollutant is solely responsible.

 Indeed, the researchers will report in the June Environmental Health 
Perspectives, "the most robust association" emerged when they considered 
variations in NO2, CO, and SO2 together, not as individual risk factors.

 In a second experiment, Pereira's team measured carboxyhemoglobin in the 
umbilical-cord blood of 47 healthy babies born to nonsmokers. 
Carboxyhemoglobin-produced when CO replaces oxygen in hemoglobin, the 
oxygen-carrying component of blood-proved most abundant in newborns delivered 
on days when outdoor CO concentrations were highest.

 Since carboxyhemoglobin reduces the blood's ability to carry oxygen, high 
outdoor CO concentrations may impair a fetus' ability to get oxygen, the 
researchers say. In fact, Pereira notes, hypoxia, or insufficient oxygen, was 
the reported cause of most fetal deaths.

 These carboxyhemoglobin data suggest that the study's links between combustion 
pollutants and fetal death "were not spurious," says Richard A. Levinson, 
associate executive director of the American Public Health Association in 
Washington, D.C.

 The new findings also threaten to reshape discussions of pollution's social 
costs. In terms of the impact of pollutants on years of life lost, most 
analysts "have focused on the elderly," observes Loomis. "It would be a 
completely different story if fetal mortality were implicated."  

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 20, May 16, 1998, p. 309. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service.

 References:  

 Pereira, L.A.A., D. Loomis, et al. 1998. Association between air pollution and 
intrauterine mortality in Sao Paulo, Brazil. Environmental Health Perspectives 
106(June):325.

 Further Readings: 

 Raloff, J. 1997. . Science News 152(Nov. 8):292.

______. 1997. Clinton accepts new clean air proposals. Science News 152(July 
5):6.

_____. 1995. Outdoor carbon monoxide: Risk to millions. Science News 148(Oct. 
14):247.

______. 1995. Heart-y risks from breathing fine dust. Science News 148(July 
1):5.

______. 1994. Are indoor gases sickening microcircuits? Science News 146(Nov. 
19):327.

______. 1991. Dust to dust: A particularly lethal legacy. Science News 
139(April 6):212.

 Sources:  

 Richard A. Levinson American Public Health Association1015 15th Street, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20005

 Dana Loomis University of North Carolina School of Public Health Department of 
Epidemiology Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7400

 Luiz A.A. Pereira Laboratorio de Poluicao Atmosferica Experimental 
Experimental, Departamento de Patologia Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade 
de Sao Paulo Av. Dr. Arnaldo 455 ccp: 01246-903 Sao Paulo, Sp. Brasil

copyright 1998
