Science News Online (4/4/98): Why Are Boys' Birth Rates Falling? by J. Raloff

 April 4, 1998 

 Why Are Boys' Birth Rates Falling?

by J. Raloff 

 To the mother of a rambunctious boy who courageously dives over furniture and 
survives a daily bruising while cavorting around the house, the idea that her 
junior commando might be fragile would probably elicit a hearty laugh.

 During fetal development, however, "the male sex is clearly the more fragile 
one," observes Bruce B. Allan, an obstetrician-gynecologist in Calgary, 
Alberta. While some 125 males are conceived for every 100 females, he notes, 
only about 106 boys are born for every 100 girls. In other words, he explains, 
stillbirths and miscarriages disproportionately cull boys.

 In the April 1 Journal of the American Medical Association, Devra Lee Davis of 
the World Resources Institute (WRI) in Washington, D.C., and her colleagues 
analyze recent surveys by Allan and others who have looked at trends in sex 
ratios and congenital male reproductive problems in several countries. They 
find a broad pattern of waning male births and increasing reproductive defects. 
"There are compelling biological reasons," Davis' team argues, for suspecting 
that these troubling trends trace to a common problem -- disruption of normal 
male fetal development by environmental agents (SN: 1/22/94, p. 56).

 Last year, Allan's team studied sex ratios in Canada from 1930 to 1990. The 
proportion of males rose for 2 decades -- a trend that they suspect reflects 
the nation's improving health care. The ratio then held steady until 1970, when 
"we saw a drop in every region," Allan told Science News. The most significant 
drop -- 5.6 boys per 1,000 live births, or twice the drop in the rest of Canada 
-- occurred in the Atlantic provinces.

 Because the sex ratio at birth "is a parameter that really shouldn't change" 
in a healthy, well-cared-for population, Allan says, his team decided to 
analyze U.S. births over the same period. "And though more subtle, the male sex 
ratio was dropping there, too," by about 1 boy per 1,000 births.

 Over the past 2 years, Dutch and Danish researchers have reported similar 
drops in their countries. Just last month, data in APMIS, a journal published 
in Copenhagen, reported declining male births in Sweden, Germany, Norway, and 
Finland.

 Evidence of a decline over such a broad geographic area, says WRI's Michelle 
B. Gottlieb, a coauthor of the new study, "suggests that avoidable, [likely] 
environmental, factors may be playing a role." Though certain diseases, older 
parents, and fertility-stimulating drugs have all been linked to an increasing 
proportion of female births, Gottlieb's team found that these factors could 
explain only a small part of the observed trend.

 Meanwhile, she says, several recent studies point to the possible importance 
of ubiquitous hormonelike pollutants. For instance, a 1996 study reported the 
sex of children born to couples who had been exposed to large amounts of dioxin 
during a July 1976 industrial accident near Seveso, Italy. In the first 8 years 
after the accident, 12 daughters -- and no sons -- were born to the nine 
couples who had more than 100 parts per trillion (ppt) of dioxin in blood 
samples taken at the time of the accident.

 Among the four couples whose dioxin concentrations were below 100 ppt, the 
male-female ratio approached normal, says Larry L. Needham, who with his 
colleagues at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta 
analyzed the blood samples. He's now examining another 1,000 samples from other 
Seveso victims.

 The new report "focuses attention on a trend that people might not have 
noticed by viewing individual studies," says Shanna Swan, a reproductive 
epidemiologist with the California Department of Health Services in Berkeley. 
"The consistency of the data is quite compelling -- and lends biological 
plausibility that [the trend] might be due to environmental chemicals," she 
adds.

 Indeed, the WRI analysis presents "a coherent, plausible argument for the 
[birth] ratio being a sentinel indicator -- a flag" of a potential problem, 
says Boston University epidemiologist Richard Clapp. By scouting out "hot 
spots" where sex ratios are especially skewed, he says, "we might now get 
closer to finding the causative agents."

 References:  

 Allan, B.B., et al. 1997. Declining sex ratios in Canada. Canadian Medical 
Association Journal 156(Jan. 1):37.

 Davis, D.L., et al. 1998. Reduced ratio of male to female births in several 
industrial countries. Journal of the American Medical Association 279(April 
1):1018.

 Further Readings: 

 Moller, H. 1998. Trends in sec-ratio, testicular cancer and male reproductive 
hazards: Are they connected? APMIS 106:232.

 Needham, L.L. 1996. Change in sex ratio with exposure to dioxin. Lancet 
348(Aug. 10):409.

 Raloff, J. 1997. Penile birth defect on the rise. Science News 152(Nov. 
29):344.

______. 1995. Beyond estrogens. Science News 148(July 15):44.

______. 1994. . Science News 145(Jan. 22):56.

______. 1994.. Science News 145(Jan. 8):24.

______. 1993. EcoCancers. Science News 144(July 3):10.

 Sources: 

 Richard Clapp Boston University School of Public Health Department of 
Environmental Health715 Albany Street Boston, MA 02118-2526

 Shanna Swan California Department of Health Services Reproductive Epidemiology 
Section964 The Alameda Berkeley, CA 94707

copyright 1998
