Science News Online (5/9/98): Gamma-Ray Burst Makes Quite a Bang by R. Cowen

 May 9, 1998

 Gamma-Ray Burst Makes Quite a Bang

by R. Cowen

 For one brief moment, long ago in a far-away galaxy, a titanic explosion 
poured a torrent of gamma rays into space. Some 12 billion years later -- Dec. 
14, 1997 -- this flash of radiation reached Earth.

 Astronomers are calling this gamma-ray burst "the most powerful explosion 
since the Big Bang." While that may be hyperbole, researchers have calculated 
that this cosmic flash packed 100 times more energy than a supernova explosion. 
Until now, researchers had considered supernovas the most energetic phenomenon 
known.

 For the second or two that it lasted, "this burst was as luminous as all the 
rest of the entire universe," says S. George Djorgovski of the California 
Institute of Technology in Pasadena, a member of the team reporting the finding 
in the May 7 Nature. The group calculated the energy from the brightness of the 
burst and its afterglow, as well as the distance of the host galaxy from Earth 
-- 12 billion light-years.

 Gamma rays from the burst were detected by the Dutch-Italian BeppoSAX 
satellite and NASA's Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. Then came a crucial step in 
finding the host galaxy. BeppoSAX also recorded an X-ray afterglow, part of the 
smoldering fireball that lingers after gamma rays have vanished.

 A few hours later, using the afterglow as a guide, Jules P. Halpern of 
Columbia University and his colleagues detected a visible-light afterglow, they 
report in the May 7 Nature. Two weeks later, Djorgovski's team used the Keck II 
Telescope on Hawaii's Mauna Kea to find the host galaxy.

 This marks the second time that astronomers have measured the distance to a 
galaxy that hosted a gamma-ray burst (SN: 5/17/97, p. 305).

 These observations settle the long-standing debate over whether most gamma-ray 
bursts originate within our galaxy or far beyond it, some astronomers say. 
However, several of the findings call into question a popular theory in which 
bursts are generated when two dense stars, known as neutron stars, collide and 
merge.

 Dale A. Frail of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory in Socorro, N.M., 
notes that to generate the energy associated with the Dec. 14 burst, virtually 
the entire mass of the neutron stars had to have been converted into gamma rays 
-- an unlikely situation.

 Frail told Science News that data from another burst, detected March 29, may 
prove equally damning for the theory. For the first time, researchers glimpsed 
an afterglow at radio wavelengths before finding one in visible light.

 That sequence suggests that the burst originated from a place containing lots 
of dust, which blocks visible light but is transparent to radio waves. Stellar 
nurseries are rich in dust, and previous studies have hinted that several other 
bursts originated in star-forming locales. Neutron stars "cannot merge within 
star-forming regions," asserts Bohdan Paczyn'ski of Princeton University. He 
explains that during the 100 million years or so that it would take for neutron 
stars to form and merge, they would have migrated from their birthplace.

 Paczyn'ski favors another model -- described in the Feb. 10 Astrophysical 
Journal Letters -- in which a massive, short-lived star undergoes a "hypernova" 
explosion, hurling a shock wave into space at nearly the speed of light.   

 From Science News, Vol. 153, No. 19, May 9, 1998, p. 292. Copyright O 1998 by 
Science Service.

 References:  

 Halpern, J.P., et al. Optical afterglow of the g -ray burst of 14 December 
1997. Nature 393(May 7):41.

 Kulkarni, S.R., S.G. Djorgovski, et al. 1998. Identification of a host galaxy 
at redshift z = 3.42 for the g -ray burst of 14 December 1997. Nature 393(May 
7):35.

 Paczynski, B. 1998. Are gamma-ray bursts in star-forming regions? 
Astrophysical Journal Letters 494(February 10):L45.

 Further Readings: 

 Cowen, R. 1997. Gamma-ray burst mystery continues. Science News 151(May 
17):305.

 Sources: 

 S. George Djorgovski California Institute of Technology Palomar Observatory 
105-24 Pasadena, CA 91125

 Dale A. Frail National Radio Astronomy Observatory P.O. Box 1003 Lopezville 
Road Socorro, NM 87801

 Bohdan Paczynski Princeton University Princeton University Observatory 
Princeton, NJ 08544-1001

copyright 1998
